everyone Laszlo Montgomery again coming
to you for the hundred and 15th time
exclusively from the China history
podcast calm recently I ordered writer
Lynn joiners 2009 work entitled
honorable survivor Mao's China
mccarthy's America and the persecution
of John s service I don't know exactly
why the life of John service
particularly intrigued me
I knew of John service back in my
college days and that he was one of the
famous China hands of the 1930s and 40s
and that his name was included in the
short list of those singled out for
supposedly losing China let me put the
good old air quotes around the words
losing China the more I read of Lin
joiners excellent book on the life of
John service the more I began to realize
I think we might have the makings here
of another one of those multi-part
episodes that I've been putting out from
time to time when I first considered the
subject with John's service I was
thinking how was I going to accumulate
enough factoids and interesting stuff on
John services life to fill a 30 minute
podcast episode then I found Lynch
owners book and this led me to this and
led me to that and now I'm already
trying to reign in this one and not let
it spin out of control and then in the
middle of researching this topic I
realized man this is the time to bring
out Barbara Tuchman still well in the
American experience in China you see in
looking at the life and times of John's
service you sorta get five or six
podcasts for the price of one
there is a veritable cavalcade of stars
who give the performances of their life
during this wartime epoch they're worthy
to principle sound stages where this
whole drama was played out that was
chong ching aka Chung King and the other
was yen on then once you through
Washington DC into the mix the drama
sometimes descended into a three-ring
circus now usually I will give you at No
additional charge to the basic fee
you're paying right now a list of
Chinese terms from the episode so that
you could follow along and not get
tripped up by any of the futon plot but
in this series I'm gonna throw so many
names at you especially in part two of
this budding epic story what I'll do is
keep a running list of who's who so you
can keep everyone straight there were
political guys military guys envoys OSS
spies Yanks Brits but in telling this
story we can get a feel for those times
that follow the Japanese invasion in
1937 in the civil war that followed the
entire subject of us-china relations
since the earliest days in the 18th
century has always fascinated me even
today thanks to all my expat heroes in
China who get the word out in so many
different ways I can't get enough of
us-china news and analysis so it's
interesting to me to look at the state
affairs today with us-china relations
and contrast it to this interesting time
from basically the Mukden incident to
the final defeat of the nationalist
forces in 1949 all these
larger-than-life characters all mingle
together at one time the cities of
Shanghai Beijing Hong Kong couldn´t Ming
Chongqing and Yunnan the reason why this
period was so important was because of
the magnitude of the failure when you
think about the what-ifs and lost
opportunities from the diplomatic
failures of this time it's staggering it
was an amazing mix of big egos and fairy
aura tea complexes people bent on
revenge with an axe to grind people just
out to make a buck revolutionaries
Patriots and competence and
personalities born to lead despite the
force of will of one of America's
greatest presidents and the work of such
amazing and dedicated people both
civilian and military there was simply
no way to bring everyone together to
read from one single hymn book
from suffering through so many past CHP
episodes covering China in the 20th
century you all know was a very rough
winding and complicated road the
aftershocks from the Cataclysm that
happened after Mao and the Communists
emerged victorious in 1949 sowed the
seeds for what George Orwell and Bernard
Baruch first called the Cold War you see
the interesting thing about John's
service was that he was hardly any one
of high rank or power he was a low-level
diplomat in his 30s when he was rubbing
elbows with the likes of Mao Joe and Lai
general Stilwell Henry Wallace Jung Kai
shek Hong mei-ling
her brother TV song and their
brother-in-law HH comb when Madame
Chiang first met him she said service
what a lovely name we hope you'll be of
service to China he was born in China
spoke Chinese and had all the necessary
sensibility sensitivities and smarts
that allowed him to be accepted by most
Chinese he wasn't a hero or giant in his
field he was a man with flaws and
weaknesses made some bad choices in his
life he became one of the more
celebrated victims of the McCarthy era
that began with the Wheeling speech I
guess on February 9th 1950 this is just
four months after Mao declared the
founding of the PRC I told the story of
Nixon's visit to China back in two of
the earliest CHP episodes number 8 and 9
RN shook miles hand
On February 21st 1972 what happened
between October 1949 when the PRC was
established and this handshake that many
say changed the world why did it take
the United States and China almost 23
years before their leaders came together
like they did in 1972
what kept these two superpowers apart
despite the obvious benefits to be
gained through mutual cooperation and
friendship well like every question of
that geopolitical so
there is a story and in this story lie
the very roots of the holiest of holies
in China the Taiwan wente the matter of
Taiwan if you think this is an emotional
issue today back in the days when John
service was moving back and forth
between Chongqing and yen on the hatred
deceit duplicity loathing and mistrust
between the Guang Liang Connie the KMT
in the CCP was at a full and rolling
boil and no matter who you were you
could only pick one side there were no
fence sitters when it came to this
subject we all know how this turns out
we all know who the Americans sided with
during the Chinese Civil War in the end
what happened happened and from that
defeat from that moment when so many
outraged Americans roared that China had
been lost the Red Scare began in earnest
and with that the whole nasty ugly cold
war we all know how it turns out but
maybe we're a little rusty on how the
story unfolded in the late 30s and into
the 40s and 50s so let's look at the
life of Jon Stewart's service and as we
do here at the Royal China history
podcast we'll put his life in the
context of the history that was going on
all around him today let's focus on his
background and where he came from and
how he rose to the level where he was
rubbing elbows with some of the most
historic men of their time like I said
service was one of those many thousands
of Westerners born and raised in China
who had mostly made their way there to
serve as missionaries or children of
missionaries services father robert or
bob as he was called did a rather gutsy
thing back in 1906 this was during Teddy
Roosevelt's second term in office he
moved to Sichuan to the city of Chengdu
to open a local office of the YMCA there
Bob service and his wife Grace brought
up three boys in this harsh environment
what harsh for a newly arrived Westerner
that is to the boy John's
servus this was the only home he knew he
grew up speaking the Sichuan dialect
which is people on the streets spoke in
Chengdu from all accounts his mother was
a saintly woman who worked tirelessly
for her family in a strange world that
wasn't their own John service was born
August 3rd 1909 the last Emperor Puyi
was on the dragon throne and being three
years old and all this Emperor wasn't
able to hold China together so 1911 and
the years that followed Xin hai
Revolution the Republic of China Sun
yat-sen you ensure Chi song shower in
one ching way the tonk monk way this was
the China that Jack service grew up in
he was home-schooled by his mother she
used a mail order service to provide the
teaching materials his friends were
fellow Western children within the
missionary community whose parents
served any number of Protestant churches
one of his earliest childhood friends
was John Paton Davies son of Baptist
missionaries remember that name he's
gonna end up getting raked over the same
coals as John service when the Red Scare
is raging as someone who has a mild
interest in China it's nothing less than
fascinating to me to think about what it
must have been like to grow up in this
world
Chengdu was not Beijing or Shanghai
not by a longshot he was about 10 years
old when the may 4th movement took off
so young John service was I guess you
could say coming of age in a China that
was unwittingly on the verge of too
bloody decades of warlordism Japanese
invasion and then civil war he attended
boarding school in Shanghai and as an 11
year old got to witness with his own
eyes the shanghai of the 1920s he was
walking the same streets of the
International Settlements as Carl crow
who we featured in CHP Oh 7-9 for his
senior year the family moved back to the
US for the occasional home leave they
were based in Berkeley California
when the home leave was over the family
went right back to Shanghai and it was
there that they were based Bob service
was riding high in the YMCA hierarchy
and was serving as a Regional Director
when John service was 17 he took off for
college attending Oberlin and becoming a
BMOC
in no time at all he met his wife
Carolyn there
Carolyn Schultz was the daughter of an
Army Corps of engineer Colonel John and
Carolyn both graduated in 1931 the
service continued on at Oberlin studying
in art history program and contemplated
life as a professor then fate intervened
doesn't it always the Japanese military
provoked the Mukden incident on 9 18
1931 and that signaled the beginning of
what was going to be 14 years of major
bloodletting between China and Japan
not to mention enmity that lasts even to
this very day the service family escaped
the worst of it and reunited in
California that's where John service
learned that his boyhood friend from
Chengdu John Paton Davies had joined the
Foreign Service and was serving in China
I guess for a young 20-something with
his unique skill set this seemed like a
good idea to do at the time John Davies
was a lifelong friend and they shared a
lot in common
by early 1933 service took off for
Shanghai to wait out the hiring freeze
at the Foreign Service and try and find
a way to get in through the back door as
a clerk and try to make himself useful
and get some priority he applied for a
gofer job at the US consulate and ended
up getting assigned to the city of
Kunming which back then was called your
nan foo his soon-to-be wife Carolyn
joined him in the Orient in November of
1933 they were married and Haiphong by a
French mayor and took off the next day
for could' Ming Carolyn hated it there
she lasted six months before being
shipped off to Shanghai to go live with
her in-laws and more
civilized living conditions and comforts
this left John service alone and
couldn't Ming now a vice consul to focus
on his job learning all the nitty-gritty
of consular operations this was his
training ground where he paid his dues
and let his natural organizational and
communication skills shine he lost his
father in the summer of 1935 on the
heels of this personal tragedy the
federal hiring freeze at the State
Department was lifted and before long he
was part of the China unit to the US
Foreign Service John and Carolyn's
service packed up and headed north to
Beijing where he began intensive
language training during this Beijing
period in his life he's still only 26 27
years old the Japanese are driving
everyone crazy with their antics in
North China especially in the new puppet
nation of Manchu Kuo it's during this
period in the fall of 1936 that service
here's edgar snow speak about his
three-month stay in yen on it mortalized
in his groundbreaking book red star over
china this is the first time john's
service hears about what the Communists
were doing up in their Shaanxi northern
china stronghold
he's very intrigued with what he hears
edgar snow introduced the communist to
the world but at this early stage no one
was taking them seriously yet that will
change on December 12 1936 when we have
the xi'an incident i'll cover this in
another podcast one of these years john
kai-shek is kidnapped and sorta
frog-marched into signing a cooperation
agreement with the communists where they
would join forces to defeat the japanese
they're followed about six months of
reluctant cooperation that fortunately
for the communists allowed them to catch
a breather and consolidate their
position in the north then july 7th 1937
the Marco Polo Bridge incident the
second sino-japanese war starts and it's
non-stop misery in China for the next
day
years it just so happens John service
was not too far away from the Marco Polo
Bridge when the shooting started he was
still in Beijing recovering from a bout
of yellow fever and heard the gunfire as
he lay in his hospital bed with these
Japanese hostilities now in full swing
the US government asked all american
dependents the following month
to get out of Dodge Carolyn took their
two kids back to America where they
waited out the crisis at her parents
place in Berkeley
John service spent his Beijing period
studying the language intensively and
gathered information for the government
in Washington about what was going down
in China the last weeks of 1937 and into
1938 witnessed the worst of the Japanese
atrocities in China the China government
had to abandon Nanjing in the face of
the onslaught and they retreated up
river to the city of Hangzhou one of the
three cities that makes up the
metropolis we know his wall hung there
the junk Ishak government did their best
to show a brave face the fantastical
myth of the Nationalists led by
Generalissimo Chiang kai-shek bravely
facing down the Japanese alone with no
help or support of any Western nation
began to be constructed and the chief
architect of that myth was none other
than Henry Luce we'll hear more about
him later he's going to become one of
the if not the most outspoken proponent
of the Chun regime and free China right
about now end of 1937 into 1938 Jung Kai
shek launched his secret weapon on the
unsuspecting this was none other than
his wife sung mailing over the next
several years she is going to play a
starring role as the face of China
during all the chaos and brutality that
was happening all over the country she
used every drop of her formidable charm
to raise money and garner support for
the
cause a free China in their loan fight
against the vicious and destructive
Japanese military machine this is where
Claire Chennault the Flying Tigers are
called in personally by madam Jiang to
assist in training Chinese pilots and to
contribute to the desperate war effort
this is also where Chanel's commanding
officer starts writing his name into the
history books this was none other than
General Joseph Warren Stilwell aka
vinegar Joe aka
Uncle Joe general Stilwell is going to
play one of the starring roles in the
political and military drama that is
going to unfold between the United
States and China between 1935 and 1944
he had served three tours of duty in
China and was fluent in Mandarin he had
been around China since 1911 in US
military law there are endless stories
about general Stilwell a West Point grad
and decorated World War one veteran he
was a soldier soldier and a great
strategist he told it like it was and
suffered no fools and famously it's his
impatient and tell it like it is
attitude that turned John kai-shek into
his biggest enemy but we'll get to that
later from 1935 to 1939 Stilwell served
as a military attache working out of the
u.s. Legation in Beijing he began to
take stock of the situation at once and
tried to get a handle on what they were
up against as far as the Japanese were
concerned this is where Stilwell got a
first look at the Communists as a
fighting force it had been more than 10
years since young with the help of the
green gang flushed out all the
Communists out of Shanghai April 12 1927
is when the Shanghai massacre commences
there was no love lost between the
nationalists and communists and it
seemed maybe just maybe these two sworn
enemies to the death might join together
now to fight their common enemy the
Japanese but you know this cooperation
it was never meant to be even after the
xi'an incident in two
December 1936 he was always a sham
despite the hardcore persuasion of the
Americans led by FDR and his advisors
and envoys there was no way in the world
that you were gonna get these two polar
opposites to bury the hatchet and join
up for the sake of the country and it
was an endless source of frustration for
Jung and all the Nationalists that they
couldn't get the Americans to see that
Americans appeared utterly oblivious to
the history the backstory and the recent
incidents that created the whole dynamic
that existed between these two foes this
whole matter of the KMT and the CCP and
all that bad blood went back almost to
the time of the party's founding in 1921
now in wartime China they both play this
game with the Americans until the end of
the war the game was called let's dupe
these Americans into thinkin we're gonna
try and get along and fight the common
enemy
but in the end forget it as far as
control of China went there was only
gonna be one winner left standing in the
end and Mao was no less determined than
Jung to be that last man standing I
can't speak for the kmt's Intel but as
far as the USA was concerned no one back
then knew anything about Mao Zedong and
his merry men who had already gone on
their long march and were establishing
their base in northern Shan XI and yen
on the Americans were curious about Mao
and what the Red Army was able to
accomplish without any outside support
the first one to try and establish
contact with the Communists was Jack's
services boyhood friend from Chengdu
John Davies
he was one of the earliest diplomats to
be saying hey we ought to get to know
these guys Jack service got himself
transferred to Shanghai where he served
in the US consulate there the Japanese
were in firm control of the city their
service performed well and continued his
ongoing diplomatic training he also
continued to exhibit his can-do attitude
and the way he was game to handle any
problem the consulate faced he worked
side by side with John Carter Vincent
who like service would later on be
considered one of the China hands of
this period more of John Carter Vincent
later the Japanese took hun Cole on
October 28 29 1938 the city had served
as a temporary resting spot for the
China government but once the heat got
turned on too high they had to move
further west to Chongqing about 600
miles away there in Chongqing they set
up the nationalist government apparatus
and it was from here that the wartime
government held fast the city would face
merciless bombing raids that went on
until the Japanese could no longer fight
once things got too dicey Jack's family
was evacuated again they had come back
when things had calmed down somewhat but
now was no time to risk the lives of his
whole family so he he sent them back to
America to wait out the crisis and
plunged headfirst into the endless hours
of work as third secretary of the US
Embassy in Chongqing you know during
these early years of their marriage and
even when the kids started coming John
and Carolyn's service were apart
constantly for long periods of time and
another thing about John's service by
the way he was great at writing reports
but not too good at writing home in
Shanghai by the way he worked under
Clarence II Gauss Gauss was a longtime
foreign service veteran of China serving
as a diplomat in China between 1912 and
1944 the last three years as US
ambassador to China he served briefly
also as a minister to Australia before
Roosevelt sent them back to China to
serve as the wartime ambassador there he
was on no-nonsense brilliant and capable
diplomat though he didn't speak Chinese
the fantasy of KMT CCP cooperation to
please the Americans was still in full
swing the hatred between the two
opposing sides was as hot as any rivalry
or feud but FDR and the State Department
could not let go of that thing that they
had about the CCP and KMT joining
together
and fighting side-by-side against the
Japanese they didn't know back in 1943
what we know now about the futility of
getting these two sides to come together
back then now in retrospect we can all
say you know what were these guys
thinking back then there was this
naivete about the dynamic in China the
history of these two groups the KMT and
the CCP the whole situation on the
ground in the cities the villages we'd
be surprised at the magnitude of the
ignorance about China in the halls of
power in Washington in the 1930s and 40s
and I hate to say this most of all I
guess with our indestructible four-term
32nd president Franklin Delano Roosevelt
the questions they ask the things they
assumed the orders they gave and other
utterances recorded down that made it
down to this present day I'm sure on
both sides KMT and CCP these guys must
have thought man these Americans don't
know diddly squat about anything here in
China this was going to be a
winner-take-all fight and it seemed only
jeong mao and their people knew it for
the sake of appearances and to stick
close to the americans for the sake of
possible support the CCP kept a
representative in kmt controlled
chongqing and this reps name was none
other than joe Enlai and it didn't take
long for john's service to meet with joe
the u.s. as anyone who listens to Ray
Harris Jr's brilliant masterpiece of a
podcast series we'll know took a long
time to get in the war Hitler invaded
Poland in September 1939 it took until
Pearl Harbor in December 41 for the u.s.
to declare war on the Axis powers before
then the US was neutral
well neutral and not neutral we knew who
we had our money on but nothing overt
was done until now March of 1941 the act
to further promote the defense of the
USA was passed by the US Congress this
became known as lend-lease
a lot of crooks got rich off this if
anyone in the present day thinks what
happened in Iraq was the first time US
contractors ripped off the taxpayers
guess again the benefits of the
lend-lease program were first meant to
help out our erstwhile allies and
European cousins the British but now FDR
had it extended to the Chinese and the
Russians now only 3% of the 50 billion
that the u.s. gave and lend-lease
support actually went to China you know
they had 3% how much of that was wasted
or ended up in some corrupt officials
pocket was staggering it wasn't just the
KMT officials and military top brass who
were getting rich off of this plenty of
Americans too were in on etson I don't
have all the figures but plenty of stuff
fell off the back of the truck and was
sold highest bidders and the black
markets of China a company was set up to
deal with all the minutia of actually
getting the supplies material and
whatnot from the u.s. to the hands of
the Chinese and Americans on the other
end who distributed everything to where
it was needed most or yield at the
highest profit I guess in most cases the
company was called the China defense
Supply Company and to make sure
everything was kept honest they made TV
song the sole agent with Tommy the cork
Corcoran as general counsel
Tommy the cork was one of FDR's kitchen
cabinet to use a term from the Reagan
era the guy in charge of lend-lease and
for the time being was FDR's economic
advisor Lachlan curry and for the time
being he was FDR's main point man for
all things China Laughlin curry was
actually Canadian by birth and I'd say
he's a little known but quite
controversial bloke for mid twentieth
century US history he had been sent to
Chongqing by Roosevelt earlier to meet
with the two leading representatives of
the KMT of ccp there namely Zhang Kai
shek and Joanne lye and it was from this
visit
after meeting with Jung and Jo made by
curry
that lend-lease got switched on in China
they both let this presidential envoy
know they needed help fast or they'd be
overrun by the Japanese curry in his
naivete came back from this fact-finding
trip and convinced Roosevelt that junk
Ishak seemed to be teetering between
installing a dictatorship or possibly
going the American Way a liberal
democracy with all the fruits nuts sugar
and fixins and I bow my head in shame
but the great FDR himself he just wasn't
getting true and accurate advice and
himself wasn't what you'd call terribly
knowledgeable about China
so curry urged FDR to send a special
adviser to Jung to keep him on staff
there to hang around the Generalissimo
and keep the White House informed on all
the latest chatter and buzz going on in
wartime Chongqing once all the ducks
were in a row one of the first things
done with the lend-lease program in
China was to arrange for the transfer of
desperately needed aircraft to China
along with a hundred pilots who formed
the first American volunteer group the
AVG and they have been immortalized in
the history books Hollywood and
corporate America as the Flying Tigers
who were led by General Claire Chennault
in a nutshell their mission impossible
was to defend the Chinese against the
Japanese my first job out of college was
with the flying tiger line I had just
moved to LA and my cousin Dennis got me
a job there the company had been formed
by a former flying tiger pilot named
Robert L Prescott FedEx bought them in
1989 and that's when I skedaddled from
the company and moved to Hong Kong
anyway the Americans find out right
quick
they had to handle Jang kai-shek like he
was a loaded keg of dynamite the
prevailing attitude in the early part of
the war in 1941 was to keep stroking his
ego make nice make promises and keep the
Generalissimo in the war tying down the
Japanese at all costs they had to
prevent the Japanese warm
from just steamrolling all over the
place this would allow the Japanese
military planners to free up troops and
equipment that could be used elsewhere
I'll repeat that because that was key to
American strategy they had to keep young
in the game and offering up resistance
to the Japanese military and the problem
that provided the constant source of
disagreement and frustration for
us-china relations at the time was John
was more intent on using the resources
available to him at the time to
finishing off what he failed to do in
the Shanghai massacre than in fighting
the Japanese so into this noxious mix
arrived US ambassador Clarence Gauss and
the new presidential special adviser to
John kai-shek owen lattimore this great
china hand grew up in in Tianjin where
parents taught English he was a scholars
scholar a great writer and one of the
preeminent Mongolian and inner Asian
specialists of his day when FDR called
him in to do this job
he had already long established a name
for himself as someone who knew China so
at the US mission in Chongqing were
ambassador gauss his deputy chief of
mission john carter Vincent John service
and Owen Lattimore although clarence
gauss was not a Mandarin speaker between
all four of those guys you had a lot of
knowledge and understanding about what
was going on in China of that team of
experts John service had the best
fluency in Mandarin this made him a
natural go-to guy for many things that
came up one of the things service did
was to prepare a daily cheat sheet of
all the news going on in China sort of a
precursor of Bill bishops sinus ISM
report like Bill bishops cynicism this
briefing that service put together
became dreg or reading for any diplomat
wanting to keep tabs and what was really
going on in China
John's service was just one of those
amazing administrative machines who knew
how to churn out reports handle all
kinds of technical communications
matters
set up meetings be a fixer Handler and
was altogether indispensable to
ambassador ghosts in the months leading
up to Pearl Harbor everyone did their
job and tried to humor Johnny he was a
suspicious character to begin with but
all the secrecy at the Embassy and the
complications and paranoia caused by
having the CCP in the picture and on the
rise seemingly was doing nothing to
advance the cause of us-china relations
you see the Red Army by this time in
1941 had managed to make a few headlines
with their own victories against the
Japanese up in the north so they were
getting a little bit of shine on them
and this of course made John kai-shek
furious and more determined than ever to
stamp them out but now that the US of A
was in for a penny and for a pound as
far as world war ii was concerned they
were trying like crazy to bring the
fighting abilities of Mao's red army
into the fold that would be a nice
addition to the war effort in china
edgar snow had already opened up
Pandora's box so everyone knew about
them and that they knew how to fight
back against the Japanese and if they
couldn't kill Japanese soldiers they
knew how to carry out guerrilla tactics
that slowed them down and made the lives
of the Japanese miserable so now that
America had declared war on Japan and
their allies they totally changed the
dynamic in Chongqing John's service
later recalled quote the Chinese were
beside themselves with excitement and
pleasure to them this meant assurance of
victory they set back after that he
didn't do much yeah old moneybags was
finally in the war and everyone in
Chongqing was positioning themselves to
get a piece of the action and John
Stewart's service 32 years old was right
in the center of the universe as far as
the war effort in China went there's a
little sidebar Lin joiner mentions in
her book about what a stand-up guy
John's service was ambassador gauss had
managed to procure a new car for the
embassy use in chongqing the problem was
that the car was down in rangoon
Burma remember when the Japanese bombed
Pearl Harbor they didn't stop there when
FDR gave his famous speech about the day
that will live in infamy he announced
that the Japanese had also bombed Hong
Kong Guam the Philippines Wake and
Midway Islands they were on a major role
in moving in a westerly direction
towards Burma natural resources heaven
so service said to his boss the
Ambassador hey man don't worry I'll head
south to Rangoon pick up the car and
drive it back before the Japanese swarm
in and all hell breaks loose he arrived
in Rangoon which was already feeling the
stress of the impending Japanese
invasion air raids were already going on
service found the car and drove the
whole Burma Road for three weeks back to
ambassador Gauss and brought the
cigar-chomping diplomat 3,000 cigars in
the boot of his car it's 1942 dawned
John kai-shek did something he would
live to regret
he told FDR that the president should
send an American to serve as part of the
Allied military command in China that
you know FDR had just given to John this
is where vinegar Joe enters the story
again Jung is gonna learn to hate this
guy
their feud was legendary in the annals
of World War two history where China was
concerned
you see I explained Stilwell's
personality the combination of military
brilliance guts experience and a blunt
outspoken style a guy like Stilwell with
all his years in China and fluent in the
language he had to have known he was
crossing the line as far as Lima was
concerned her etiquette you see by now
Stilwell had seen enough he had come to
know both sides quite well and at that
time in 1942 he considered the KMT as
rotten self-serving and ineffective as a
military force John's plan was the best
known secret amongst the cognoscenti he
was using his numerical superiority in
the field to pen the Red Army in and not
let them scatter from there
hold in the north then he was gonna wait
out the war and once Japan was defeated
which was inevitable everyone believed
he'd used the whole I was military
muscle all the stockpiled lend-lease
weapons and supplies and just go pound
the Red Army and finished the job off
once and for all but this isn't what the
American government wanted and this
strategy that they believed Young was
using ran counter to what Stilwell was
sent there to do in the first place so
as I said a whole peking opera was going
to be played out between all these
players the US military people the
diplomats the visiting VIPs and
delegations constantly shuttling in and
out of Chongqing Chiang kai-shek Madam's
young TV song Winston Kong Ty Lee and
all the while bombs would be raining
down on the city and John service was
right in the center of all this now
Stilwell had been around a long time but
he had never officially been introduced
to John kai-shek so this is when their
personal relationship begins in earnest
early 1942 this is the worst part of the
war for America and her allies in the
Pacific Theater in the months that
followed Pearl Harbor the Japanese just
rolled in like an unstoppable force of
nature
the Allies hadn't been able to organize
a coordinated defense and nothing was
going right yet the Burma Road the solve
lifeline from the outside world into
Southwest China where the government was
holed up in Chongqing was finally cut
off with the closure of the Burma Road
this is when history witnesses the
beginning of those daring and heroic
pilots who flew supplies into China over
the hump as the Himalayas were called
the heat was really being turned up in
Chongqing with respect to the control of
the narrative and the agenda millions of
1942 dollars were at stake now and
whoever controlled the lend-lease
supply chain controlled the Commission's
and profits so serious measures were
taken to keep everyone off the scent of
the corruption going on the censorship
and restrictions were oppressive and one
the KMT few admirer
especially those working in the US
Embassy everyone on all sides knew the
score but no one dared to make any move
against the other they all have to get
along less Roosevelt get wise to the
situation their ass no job had to be
carried out on anyone who came sniffing
around looking for dirt to bring back to
the president despite all the
restrictions and what was allowed out of
Chongqing and where one was allowed to
go
John's service with his fluency in
Mandarin his willingness to take a risk
and his natural abilities just melt into
the population went out everywhere to
get the skinny and what was up and who
was doing what he did this and he was
very effective and like he always did he
wrote up those excellent reports for his
superiors who then you know looked like
they knew what they were doing when they
took services hard work and presented it
to the president and his advisors he was
John's service and one of his
fact-finding missions who first learned
about the beginnings of the Hunan Famine
this was one of the great unknown
tragedies in 20th century China the
wheat millet and corn crop all failed
rains didn't come and the lean crop
yields of 1940-41 were long consumed
nothing new came in 1942 a famine of
biblical proportions is going to hit
Honan which is one of the two or three
most populous provinces in the most
populous country in the world you know
if you get the picture the Hunan famine
was actually three disasters in one
first it was a natural disaster caused
by drought
second it was a disaster because the
whole province was a war zone and the
Japanese were doing their thing up there
then the third disaster was the policies
of opportunistic KMT officials who did
nothing to provide aid to famine victims
and in fact ended up carrying out a
brutal and repressive tax policy that
left the farmers with nothing and before
you know it it was like the Great Leap
Forward that would follow 17 years later
no one was left standing who could pull
a plow or work the fields by the time
this famine wound down in 1944
three million Hunan red had died of
starvation
John service brought word back to
Chongqing of what was going on including
on and when he filed his report which
made it all the way to the top detailing
the extent of the human tragedy taking
place he placed blame on the Nationalist
government for exacerbating an already
horrific situation well if he wasn't a
marked man already he was now the kmt
sensors and intelligence community
stopped at nothing to prevent reports
like this from getting out something of
this magnitude had to be suppressed less
those on the outside learn that the
Nationalists couldn't or wouldn't deal
with it after hearing from service about
this famine time correspondent Theodore
White when all over her none and
reported on the extent of the disaster
there his March 1943 article and Time
magazine was a wake-up call to the
American public that something was going
on in China that didn't reflect well on
the ones in charge
it all just made junk I shocked that
much more paranoid when news like this
got out okay let's call it a day right
here early 1942 we have the whole setup
now for the life and career of John
service in part two of this series it
may finish in two or perhaps go to three
who knows we'll look at the whole
continuing saga of us-china relations
during the war years and right after
more of Uncle Joe the Dixie mission and
of course I know you're all anxious for
Patrick early to make his grand entrance
clear divisions are drawn everyone has
taken sides you're either pro Chang or
you're not and if you're not there's a
good chance you were sympathetic to the
Communists and the word Communist
communism although certainly nothing
good about that and the mainstream
American psyche back in the 30s and 40s
but it did not have nearly the stink or
taint that it did in the 1950s in the
McCarthy era so as John's service cozies
up more with the CCP and gets totally
involved in the Dixie mission and the
whole radioactive
out of patrick Hurley's presence in
china he's gonna find himself in boiling
hot water when the witch hunts commence
so hang in there and in the next episode
number 116 we will continue on where we
left off here at the Royal China history
podcast this is a good story isn't it
there are so many documents interviews
books private papers memoirs you name it
from this time so all the dirt flying
back and forth in Chongqing during the
Warriors make fascinating reading for
anyone with the time and curiosity to
check out all those documents great
Seneca podcasts this last one from April
4th on the transgressions of Apple
Computer and a rare appearance by David
Wolfe which is always an unexpected
treat and Kaiser and Jeremy also have a
new and insightful China hand who I've
never heard of before Lori Burkett from
the WSJ
Wow DL that one if you have any interest
whatsoever in the China consumer market
great discussion we'll be back next week
to look at John's service and the China
hands of yesteryear if we get to it in
part two we'll show how these men were
torn down and destroyed because they I
guess in a way did much the same thing
Seneca and many other China hands today
are doing they were experts on the
ground in China and they got the word
out about what was happening without
adding any high-fructose corn syrup or
spin to what they saw with their own
eyes and for doing this kind of
reporting and giving opinions John's
service and these other China hands
we'll get to know in the next episode
are gonna be hung over the flames by
their thumbs in a manner of speaking
that is so once again as the great one
in Casey always says I hope you enjoyed
that this is Laszlo montgomery of the
china history podcast signing off from
lovely claremont california city of
trees and PhDs another perfect day here
in Cali if I say so myself I have an
overnighter to Bentonville Arkansas next
week but other than that no travel on
the horizon and I can't tell you how
glad I am about that mid-september
though I'm coming to Beijing for about
two
and very much looking forward to that
take care everyone and I look forward to
seeing you next time for another
exciting episode of the China history
podcast